# Quick fixes...or "fixes"?

## 2023-08-28 device descriptor read/64, error -71
Just encountered a wired problem with my laptop running Arch Linux - after I tried to disconnect my suddenly stopped working mouse with 'disconnect' command in bluetoothctl, the entire bluetooth device stopped working with error 'device descriptor read/64, error -71' in dmesg output. Rebooting couldn't resolve the issue. After a lot searches on web, finally I found a 'wired' solution[1]: power off the laptop entirely with 'shutdown -h now'; unplug all cables like power/HDMI, etc.; wait for a few seconds; power on and plug cables back...which worked! Problem solved...in a way I don't understand.
=> https://askubuntu.com/questions/1119239/bluetooth-problem-continuous-turn-on-off-every-23-seconds [1] solution on askubuntu.com

## 2023-08-17
Google services are strictly blocked in my country. Many sites I want to visit load JavaScript from ajax.googleapi.com, and more worse, many of these sites put the <script src> tag at the begining of their html pages(which is a bad practice in web developing), then every time I visit such a page, I have to wait until the ajax.googleapi.com request to timeout before I can see any content of the pages.

I'm not blaming owners of these web sites, I'm very clear that the only one should be cursed on is the one who blocked many web services. I'm just curious - why on earth content focused sites need JavaScript at the first place? And even if they do want JavaScript for their sites, do they really need a "library" like jQuery in 2023?

Anyway, I blocked all request to ajax.googleapi.com in my browser, so the requests to them fails immediately. And yes I didn't see any problem on these pages without 'jQuery'. Problem solved.

## 2023-08-14
* Struggled for a while but still can't make emoji works on urxvt. Switched to st[1], everything just works out of box. Problem solved.
* Gemini client amfora[2] keeps showing strange characters, and can't show some preformatted text correctly. Export LC_CTYPE=en_US.UTF-8, problem solved.
=> http://st.suckless.org/ [1] st from suckless
=> https://github.com/makew0rld/amfora [2] amfora
